---
title: Lessons Learned from a Teaching Assistant
category: General
---

<script type="text/javascript"
  src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS_CHTML">
</script>
<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
  MathJax.Hub.Config({
    tex2jax: {
      inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']],
      processEscapes: true},
      jax: ["input/TeX","input/MathML","input/AsciiMath","output/CommonHTML"],
      extensions: ["tex2jax.js","mml2jax.js","asciimath2jax.js","MathMenu.js","MathZoom.js","AssistiveMML.js", "[Contrib]/a11y/accessibility-menu.js"],
      TeX: {
      extensions: ["AMSmath.js","AMSsymbols.js","noErrors.js","noUndefined.js"],
      equationNumbers: {
      autoNumber: "AMS"
      }
    }
  });
</script>

For 8 years, I've been teaching through avenues like YouTube, class presentations, office hours and review sessions. The benefits of teaching are very real: teaching helps me re-master topics, articulate my thought processes, and connect with fellow students on the teaching side and on the learning side. What I want to bring up here is that in the 8 years, I've been unsatisfied with my approach to teaching. I'll tell you why, how I got there, and what I'm changing.

## A representative, unsatisfactory lesson

Last year, I taught a class to high schoolers. I ended up running out of time. I felt exhausted, and my back was in pain. I didn't know if students were really that interested. Even if they were, that's not me, it's just their math inclinations, I thought. I had prepared the _perfect_ sequence of questions and definitions to lead to the main theorem. And I felt wasted.

This has happened to me so frequently.

## Attempts to fix

My initial reaction was often that I wanted to be a better TA. It might be natural to think I didn't find the right sequence of questions. 

what did I expect? What did success look like here? Here's a list in no particular order:

1. Students are inspired by the topic.
1. Students are curious to dive into the math themselves.
1. Students talk a lot and ask creative questions because they are so inspired.
1. Students think about how cool I am for knowing the math and presenting it is such a brilliant way
1. The purpose of my life becomes clear, and I ascend to become a god tier TA.

I had goals, I don't have full control over any of these goals. Even with perfect execution on my part, everything could fall apart. These aren't necessarily bad. I have to feed my ego at some point. I did however lose the thread. 


Recently I told my friend, JP, about a similar situation.

## Back in My Court

So, of the things in my control, what does success look like? Here's a list in no particular order.

1. Students know about $X$, $Y$, and $Z$ about the topic.
1. I genuinely believe that the topic is really cool.
1. I work with the students based on where they are at.
1. I'm personable and charismatic.
1. I'm excited to meet the students.






## Think critically from the student's perspective.

The most important question is "what do you want students to take away?" followed by "how do I want to accomplish that?". If the goal is to get students excited about machine learning, I don't need to spend time going through the theoretical set up. I can demonstrate the power of machine learning by presenting alpha go or chat GPT or DALL-E.

## Create an inclusive classroom.

Recognize who your audience is and where they are at. Students may be at different levels of prior knowledge and experience. Ways you can create an inclusive environment is by getting to know what each student understands, giving the right amount of guidance, inviting them with questions that don't require a leap of faith. Also, praise wrong answers so people aren't ashamed. The wrong answers are just as important in the right answers. First, take it as a sign that something in translation has gone wrong, on your end, their end, or both. It's how research is done.

## Understand your students.

Don't just be supportive. There are times when you need to be firm. For example, if the student has a negative growth mindset "I can't do", you can assue them they can and start to guide them towards the right questions. "What's the point of this class?" I could make a lot of assumptions.

- They are not ready to understand me.
- They are not listening to me.
- They do not want to be here.
- They do want to be here, and are confused, and is frustrated that they don't know what the exact question should be.
- I did not motivate the class clearly.
- I did not connect with the audience.

I got a lot of negative TA evaluations.

Surprisingly teaching and tutoring takes a large amount of human connection. More than just "I need to understand where my student is to help them". You need to trust each other. You need to put away assumptions about laziness or other differencces like that. I firmly believe the stako of a TA (controlling for monetary and altruistic incentives) needs to be maximizing the learning of the student. This may show up as:

- Finding out what the student is truly struggling with so you can pose the right question
    - If the student is ready for guidance, what is the key next step for them in the problem?
    - If you don't know the answer but the student is ready for guidance, and you have had prior experience, you can still recall from first principles what the next key steps.
    - If you're expertise is not in this area, then you should act as a sounding board. With what the student is having trouble with explore that concept together. Be curious and let the student have space to explore it too.
    - If the student is lacking background knowledge, fill it in for them.
- If the student is getting frustrated or emotional, be curious
    - If they are frustrated about the homework or course, you can assure them you will try to help, and they are not alone.
- Ask yourself whwat do these students truly need right now?
- Guiding students to solve the homework problem so they can get some sleep or not worry about the grade.
- Affirming the student's feelings and encouraging them to not give up and that learning is uncomfortable.


## Understand your motivations.

Why am I a teaching assistant? I want money. I want to be recognized by other students how I helped them. And most importantly, any teaching should have some motivation that I want the students to take away something. What that is can vary.

- Machine learning is so cool!
- I sorta understand how to apply a theoretical machine learning lense!

Without a goal to influence the students, teaching is a one-sided endeavor. 



Moving forward, some concrete things I want to apply actively putting away my assumptions, and reclaiming what needs to happen so that this student is actually learning. The diagram from above. And in addition, I think a broader lense on what do people actually need it great. Also, reflecting on what I'm getting out of it.

What do I want the people to get out of this. This is going to be a random article on the internet. I don't want it to be a memoir about me and how I sucked. I want it to be a bunch of useful tools that if a TA was reading this they would relate to those experiences and try out some of my advice.

I could phrase it as a how to article, or just meditations of a teaching assistant.


## Reflections

After some reflection. Why am I writing this article? I want to crystallize what I've learned and send it off into the world so that it can help others that resonate with the advice. 

I am now conflicted. Because of my conversation with Jeffrey. To recap, I told Jeffrey that one of my goals is to become a great TA that make students learn. Jeffrey criticized my mindset since it is a goal predicated on external outcomes. How could I measure it? If I can measure it, how could I control for other external factors. If I am the reason (okay a but Narcissistic) the students learn, will I be happy? No, I will still be looking down on the students. 

What does success look like? I want to be on the same playing field as the students, form a real connection, and be empathetic. I'm scared because I'm not exactly sure what this will look like. But I feel the fire of desire so strongly with this one.

